Once around WHG64.
What a name for a star. But really, this
is a story all about stellar evolution
caught in action. Something that we
don't really get to see very often.
So this star
16 uh sorry 160,000 light years away
from us in the large melenic cloud the
dwarf galaxy that orbits around the
Milky Way visible from the southern
hemisphere. There's this marvelous
photograph here. You can see dead center
the large melanic cloud and up to its
right its smaller more distant cousin
the small melanic cloud viewed over
these telescopes here and inset is the
image that has been obtained that is
really causing all the interest in this
bizarrely named star.
So WHG64
was actually discovered back in the
1970s
by Westerland, Olander, and Hedin, hence
the W, their initials, and is part of a
catalog of giant stars in the large
melenic cloud. You can see on the top
left there that uh it has been picked
out in detail and an artist's impression
of what we might be dealing with. Up at
the top right, a dust disc was
discovered using infrared uh astronomy
in 1986. And this is blocking about
three quarters of the visible light of
the star from reaching us, revealing
that actually we were lucky to see it at
all because uh it's been dimmed down by
a factor of four and is much more
luminous than we thought it was. So what
is the nature of the star? Well, it's a
red super giant, a massive star in the
very last stages before it will explode
as a supernova.
40 times the mass of the sun, surface
temperature 3,200 Kelvin, so red hot,
and putting out 600,000 times the power
that our sun does over an area of 3,000
times the radius.
So the area would be pi r squared, of
course, hence the uh the numbers work
out. And this was at the time a record
for the largest known star.
Now the image that I showed you at the
beginning there was made by the VTI, the
very large telescope array in Chile
acting as an intererometer using their
gravity instrument. And it's the first
close-up picture of a star outside the
Milky Way. We've been able to use this
technique of intererometry to make
images of stars like Beetlejurs and
other giant stars in the Milky Way and
even stars like Capella. But this one is
so much further away being in the large
melenic cloud. And what we're looking at
is the star in the center with a dusty
envelope. There's a bright oval in the
center and a fainter set of elliptical
rings or loops around it.
So, we think that that dust envelope
contains at least three and perhaps as
much as nine solar masses of material
that's being carried out by the stellar
wind. It's probably losing about one
solar mass every 2,000 years, which
sounds slow, but it's actually
extraordinarily rapid. It's the highest
known mass loss rate even for uh red
super giants that tend to do this a lot.
And we can also tell that we're looking
at the pole. We're looking down on the
rotational pole.
the angle of view of the dust discs uh
is making that fairly clear. But that's
also responsible for the fact that we
were actually overestimating the stars
brightness a little bit because we were
adding in the light coming from the
discs of dust as well. In particular,
that central oval. So,
it's been downclassed a little bit to
282 th uh,000 times as bright as our sun
and having a mass of only 25, not 40
solar masses u with a radius of 1,730
times the mass of the sun.
But interestingly,
we've seen what I said to uh in the
title slide,
stellar evolution in action. And we can
tell that from the light curve. This is
from the Ogal experiment. And you can
see the purple trace of how bright the
star was back from uh the early 2000s up
to date. And up until around about 2014,
it was oscillating in a fairly regular
pattern, something that we see a a
regular pulsation in brightness of these
uh red super giant stars. And then that
went away and was replaced by a rather
more erratic and uh irregular pattern
that you can see in the right hand part
of the graph there.
Not only did the brightness change, but
the spectrum changed as well. And we can
see the in the brown trace at the
bottom, the spectrum of the light from
2007.
And then after the transition in 2014,
we're looking at the top two traces,
2019 in blue, 2021 in purple, which are
both fairly similar. And the spectrum
has just changed. completely.
Something happened.
And what has in fact we think occurred
is that it has changed from being a red
super giant or even a red hyper giant up
at the top right hand corner of the
Herzbrung Russell diagram even redder
than Beetlej there and moved over
towards the yellow part of the spectrum.
So the surface temperature is hotter and
therefore we're getting more of the
higher frequency light shifting the
color from the low frequency red into
that middle frequency yellow part of the
spectrum.
And we think it has shrunk as well. Size
has reduced from about 1,700
times the radius of the sun down to
about half that 800. And so now what
we're looking at is a yellow hyper
giant. This is very unusual. We all just
don't see don't get the chance to catch
in modern times stars moving from one
spectral class to another.
So this yellow hyper giant we now think
that it has a companion star. Follow-up
studies have shown that the spectrum of
light coming from it contains hints not
only of the yellow star but of a smaller
blue white Btype companion
and that perhaps what's going on here is
that the Btype companion is stripping
away the loosely held outer layers of
the star. So the outer layers of that
red super giant were being removed by
the gravity of its companion, making the
companion build an accretion disc and
boosting its mass at the expense of its
much larger neighbor. And having removed
those outer layers, we've now exposed
the hotter inner structure within, hence
the yellow color. So the companion is a
B brackets E class star which is not to
be confused with a B star and that's
another whole story about how the
different classifications.
So the B brackets E class have
distinctive emission lines of things
like iron and other elements
and these are coming from their outer
low density envelopes and it's probably
the result of material having been
pulled over from the companion star
that's now a yellow hyper giant.
So again, that symbiotic relationship,
the gravity of the small star has been
pulling material over, exposing the
deeper, warmer layers. So all of the red
hot material of the main star has been
removed, stripped away, and pulled onto
the smaller companion. And uh we're now
seeing the inner, hotter, smaller,
denser layers of the main star.
Another possibility is that it is just
the effect of the stellar super wind,
that very high uh wind that these stars
give. But perhaps all of this is
explaining why we're seeing that very
very high mass loss rate from the star
itself.
So a fascinating object. And just uh to
add something else into this talk, I
also came across this guy Westerland
1W26.
And Westerland, the W of the initials of
the original star WG64
that we were talking about was
responsible for cataloging a lot of
these giant stars. And this one is in
the constellation of Ara and is one of
the largest and most luminous stars
known. And you can see the cluster
Westerland one that contains W26 there
in the picture. If you zoom in up into
the inset in the top right, the little
bars are marking where W26 is. And W26
is another of these cool red super giant
stars.
Originally estimated to be putting out
over a million times the power of our
sun and be 2,500 times the radius.
That's enormous. It would go right out
to the orbit of Jupiter.
But again, there's so much dust around
that the view we are getting from it is
being dimmed by a factor of a 100,000
times.
And that dust is the result of the huge
mass loss that this star is also putting
out.
So it's quite probable that this too
will undergo the same sort of transition
and become yellowower and turn into a
yellow hyper giant again. So this one is
definitely one to watch and it seems
that we are beginning to be able to
anticipate and see stellar evolution in
action.
Now that's something that I thought I
would never see in my lifetime. I
thought the stars were essentially so
long lived and unchanging that uh it
would be uh many generations into the
future before we were able to catch this
sort of event. But it seems if you look
at the right ones that that's not so. So
I hope you've enjoyed that trip around
these evolving stars. Thanks very much
for listening.